{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2512
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
24-Jul-2019\
\
RE: AER-2019-0681 "Pigou Creates Losers: On the Implausibility of Achieving Pareto Improvements from Efficiency-Enhancing Policies"\
\
Dear Jim:\
\
Thank you for submitting your paper to the American Economic Review. I have received three referee reports from experts in the literature, and I have read your paper with great interest myself.\
\
I find the referee reports very thoughtful and clear. They are also quite similar in their assessments. All the reviewers find your paper interesting and useful, but none of them are convinced that it clears the bar for the AER. Their reasoning is the following: (i) They first argue that the main theoretical result, while very nice and useful, is not sufficiently surprising or innovative given the existing literature. The fundamental insight \'96 that the presence of unobserved preference heterogeneity in externality-generating behaviors makes Pareto-improving compensation schemes very difficult \'96 is somewhat unsurprising. (ii) They argue that some of the theoretical assumptions should be relaxed, and that the execution/ambition of the theoretical analysis is a bit too limited for a top-general journal. (iii) They find the empirical application very nice \'96 and highlight that it's the combination of theory and empirics that separates your paper from the existing literature \'96 but they are not convinced that your empirical illustrations can carry a top-journal publication. (iv) They all feel that the exposition is too lengthy/verbose, lacking a bit in succinctness, for what it has to say.\
\
Broadly speaking, I agree with these thoughtful reports. I think they make useful suggestions for revising the paper. You have produced a really interesting and useful analysis \'96 it should be published well and cited \'96 but I do agree with the reviewers that it falls just short of the AER bar. I think the paper is a better fit for journals like AEJ-Policy or the JPubE, and I would support sending it to AEJ-Policy with the AER reports. An alternative would be to streamline and shorten the paper \'96 the material you currently have could be presented succinctly in a relatively short paper \'96 and try the AER: Insights. While I leave this decision to you, my gut feeling is that AEJ-Policy is a more natural outlet for this paper.\
\
I am so sorry about the disappointing news. As you know, we receive a very large number of manuscripts at the AER and can accept only a tiny fraction of submissions. This is a nice paper and I\'92m glad I got to read it and learn from it.\
\
Sincerely,\
\
Henrik Kleven\
Co-Editor American Economic Review\
\
\
Referee: 1\
\
Comments to the Author:\
\
Summary: \
\
The paper analyzes corrective taxation. It focusses on the tension between utilitarian welfare gains and Pareto-improvements. Is it possible to improve on an inefficient status quo without making some people worse off? The paper has a theoretical part that derives a necessary condition for the possibility of a Pareto-improving welfare improvement. This condition is then used in the empirical part of the analysis which has a focus on gasoline taxation. The main finding is an impossibility: There is no policy that is both welfare improving and Pareto improving. \
\
Theory:  The theoretical analysis is based on a static partial equilibrium analysis. Consumers value two goods, a numeraire and a dirty good that generates an atmospheric externality. Markets are perfectly competitive and production has constant returns to scale. Hence, Pigouvian taxes are fully passed to consumers. The corrective tax creates revenue. This revenue can be used to finance transfers to compensate those who are harmed by the introduction of the policy. The transfers can vary with socio-economic variables that are exogenous from the perspective of the transfer recipients. Thus, these are lump-sum payments that involve some tagging. A policy is called efficiency-enhancing if, at the aggregate level, benefits exceed costs. The benefit measure  includes both the direct benefits of the corrective intervention and the revenue that is raised. A policy is called Pareto-improving if, for every individual, the sum of direct benefits and transfers received exceeds the cost.  Condition 1 is the main finding of the theoretical analysis. It gives a necessary condition for the possibility of a Pareto-improvement; i.e. If this condition fails, a Pareto improvement is out of reach. Condition 1 is also the link between the theoretical and the empirical part of the paper. The empirical part investigates whether condition 1 holds in the data.\
\
Condition 1 is an inequality. On the left hand side it has a sum of two terms: \
\
1. an average of the after-compensation costs of individuals  \
2. the difference between per capita costs and per capita revenue. \
\
On the right hand side it has twice the per capita gains of the policy.\
If the left hand side is smaller, then a Pareto-improvement is out of reach. A somewhat lose interpretation is as follows: If the difference between per capita costs and revenues is below the per capita gains, the policy is efficiency enhancing. Condition 1 shows that this does not suffice for a Pareto improvement. For a Pareto improvement to be possible also the after-compensation costs have to be smaller than the benefits.  This requires that individual costs are well predictable and can be compensated by means of an appropriately designed compensation scheme. \
\
Empirics: The empirical application has a focus on gasoline taxation. Data on individual consumption expenditures is taken from the consumption expenditure survey (CEX). The years 1996 - 2016 are covered. The analysis seeks to evaluate whether an increase of gasoline taxes by ten cents per gallon would be Pareto-improving.  The analysis is based on the assumption that there has been no prior correction of externalities. This gives the policy the best chance to be Pareto-improving and makes an impossibility result more difficult to achieve. \
\
Elasticity estimates and estimates of the social cost of carbon are used to come up with an estimate of the per capita gains from the corrective tax. The loss of consumer surplus is also taken into account. The per capita benefits per year are estimated at 8.3 Dollars. The next step then is to investigate the predictability of an individual\'92s utility loss from corrective taxation using socio-economic variables. To this end, individual gasoline consumption in the the status quo is used as a measure of an individual\'91s burden from the tax. This is then regressed on socioeconomic characteristics (demographics, region, income). The prediction error from these regressions is then interpreted as the targeting error that remains under a transfer scheme that seeks to minimize the after-compensation costs of individuals. Given these measures, one can see whether condition 1  holds in the data. The answer is found to be negative, i.e. a Pareto-improvement is not possible. The paper also reports on various extensions and robustness checks that confirm this main finding. \
\
\
Overall Assessment:\
\
At a conceptual level, the tension between surplus-maximizing and Pareto-improving policies is well-known. The theory of mechanism design has a variety of impossibility results which document that one cannot move to an efficient outcome without making some people worse off. Well-known references are Myerson-Satterthwaite, 1983; Rob, 1989 and Mailath and Postlewaite, 1990.  The contribution of this paper is to depart from this pure theory perspective. It presents an empirical investigation of whether it is possible to have overall effcienciency gains and a Pareto-improvement at the same time. This is a basic question with general interest appeal. Employing, in a first step, the basic textbook version of a corrective tax also seems a natural choice. I moreover found the paper\'92s methodology interesting. Interpreting the residuals from a regression of consumption on socio-economic characteristics as the targeting error of a compensation scheme seems to be a new idea. (See, however, my comment below.)\
\
That said, I see two important and related weaknesses of the paper. \
\
First, the compensation scheme has transfers that are exogenous from the individual\'92s perspective. Moreover, there is the restriction that these transfers can depend only on broad socio-economic characteristics. This restriction drives the results.  From a theory perspective, using past consumption for the compensation scheme would also work. Past consumption is an exogenous characteristic. (With smart technologies this may be or become technically feasible. There is recent reserach on congestion externalities and road use that explores related ideas.) The empirical approach in the paper, moreover, uses past consumption as the measure of individual burdens. Consequently, the targeting error would be zero with such an approach and condition 1 would lose its bite. It would only require a policy to be efficiency enhancing. \
\
This shows that the results in the paper are sensitive to the information that can be used for the design of compensation schemes. If this information is too coarse it will not be possible to compensate each and every individual. This insight seems quite obvious.\
\
Second, condition 1 is only a necessary condition for the existence of corrective policy that is Pareto improving. Even if targeting errors are small on average, and condition 1 holds, there is no guarantee that it will be possible to compensate each and every individual. The analysis would therefore benefit from a complete characterization - in the sense of presenting necessary and sufficient conditions - for the possibility to design a Pareto improving policy. I understand that that the conditions for a possibility result will be restrictive, but they would be illuminating. The analysis would then be more complete and the point that going for Pareto-improving policies is hopeless would be made in a more convincing way.      \
\
In my view, the finding that Pigouvian taxation creates losers is not the most convincing part of the paper. Refocussing the paper on the question how the share of losers can be made small with empirically plausible compensation schemes seems a more promising avenue. The paper has interesting results on this question, and also on the distributive implications of such policies, but does not highlight them as the main result. \
\
\
Further comments: \
\
The usefulness of condition 1 is not immediately apparent. It seems to involve a double counting of costs and revenues which are then related to twice the gains from the policy. Why is this double counting useful for the possibility to bring condition 1 to the data? This should be discussed more explicitly.\
\
The formal analysis focusses on a static partial equilibrium framework. The motivation appeals to climate change and CO2 emissions - thereby raising questions about dynamics, uncertainty and general equilibrium effects. Is there a way to extend the analysis in these dimensions.\
\
At various places, the analysis invokes well-known results from consumer choice theory without making this explicit. The exposition could be improved here.\
\
1. On the definition of efficiency-enhancing and Pareto-improving polic\'edes: I suggest to make more explicit that the analysis is based on money-metric utility and welfare functions so that monetary gains and losses and gains and losses from corrective policies can be added up. \
\
2. The predictability of an individual\'92s burden is investigated by means of a regression that has consumption in the status quo as the variable on the left-hand side. I conjecture that this is an appeal to Roy\'91s identity? \
\
Section 4 is a hard read. The regressions and the error terms have a double interpretation. One the one hand, they serve to predict individual burdens from taxation. On the other hand, they are interpreted as the targeting error from the compensation scheme. I suggest to make the problem of designing a compensation scheme that minimizes the number of losers more explicit. It does not seem obvious to me that prediction errors and targeting errors are one and the same thing. I conjecture that this rests on implicit assumptions on individual preferences. \
\
I suggest to discuss the relation to the mechanism design literature more prominently. To be clear, the mechanism design literature employs virtual costs and benefits that take privacy of information into account. This paper\'91s analysis is based on actual costs and benefits. To me this seems to be a minor difference. The costs and benefits are also not really taken to be observable here. Otherwise there would be no difficulty to arrange for a Pareto-improvement. The \'84targeting error\'93 can arise only because  the transfer scheme must not condition on individual costs and benefits.\
\
\
Referee: 2\
\
Comments to the Author:\
\
This paper studies the feasibility of implementing externality-correcting taxes in a way that generates Pareto improvements. Although efficiency gains resulting from a Pigouvian tax are in principle large enough to fully compensate those who suffer losses from the policy, the necessary compensating transfers may in practice be infeasible if they must be carried out through a tax function which depends on observables that are not tightly correlated with the individual losses themselves. This paper derives a condition which can be used to test whether such a Pareto-improving reform is feasible, and then applies this test to the context of a gasoline tax in the US. It concludes that even under conservative assumptions, a Pareto-improving gas tax is infeasible, given the substantial heterogeneity in gasoline consumption conditional on observables. \
\
This paper is clearly explained and nicely executed. The combination of theoretical insight and empirical application is elegant. Although I have a number of comments and suggestions, they can be dealt with. In sum, my view is that the paper is definitely publishable, and it will be of interest to the applied public finance community. The question is whether the contribution clears the very high bar for the AER. And although I like the paper quite a lot, ultimately I do not think it does. The underlying insight that imperfect targeting undermines Pareto improvements has been discussed in the literature on income redistribution and tagging for some time. And although the application to a gasoline tax is a nice empirical application, I am not persuaded it is very informative for policy purposes. Given that most of the benefits from domestic carbon reductions accrue to non-Americans, and in any case to people who are not yet alive, the most natural prior is that a gasoline tax (for purposes of carbon reduction) would not admit Pareto improvements. The analysis here counterfactually assumes that all environmental benefits do accrue to current Americans (at least in expectation). This starkly demonstrates just how difficult Pareto improvements are, but I think it should be read more as an illustrative example than a policy-relevant finding. In sum, the key contribution of the paper is really Condition 1. That is a nice contribution! But it is a concise one, and I think it would be better suited for an outlet like AEJ: Policy or the Journal of Public Economics. \
\
I have a few more specific comments as well, which I hope the author finds useful. \
\
Major comments:\
\
1. The paper could be condensed quite a bit. As discussed above, I think the key contribution of the paper is Condition 1, followed by an illustration of its empirical implementation. That contribution is nice, but it does not require 39 pages. In particular, I think Section 4 can be shortened to reflect its status as an illustration, rather than an exhaustive policy analysis. And I think Section 5 could be eliminated, with Section 5.4 folded into the primary model section. The other topics there feel somewhat unsatisfying, perhaps better suited to thorough analysis in another paper, rather than the extended (but ultimately speculative) discussions in Section 5.\
\
2. Relatedly, Condition 1 is simplified in two important ways. First, it assumes no preexisting tax on the commodity in question (so that the revenue raised is equal to the cost imposed, to first order). Second, the covariates which are used to determine transfers are assumed to be exogenous, generating no behavioral responses from agents. As the author notes, both simplifications are conservative in the sense that they relax the condition for a Pareto improvement to be feasible. I think the paper would be stronger if Condition 1 were generalized to cover preexisting taxes and endogenous covariates. For although conservative assumptions may make sense for the empirical illustration (the point of which is to show that Pareto improving taxes are rare), I think the goal of Condition 1 should be to provide the best and tightest characterization of the Pareto improvement condition, rather than a conservative approximation of it. Moreover, it seems to me that it should be feasible to incorporate these extensions while retaining a fairly simple condition in sufficient statistics, such as the elasticity of covariates with response to tax rates. \
\
\
Minor comments:\
\
1. The first paragraph motivates the interest in Pareto improvements using examples of two types of distributional concerns: a concern for inequality (weighing against policies which impose a greater burden on the poor) and political feasibility, if harmed groups mobilize against the policy. I did not find either motive very convincing. Concerns about inequality are straightforward to incorporate directly into a social welfare maximization, in which case it is not clear why we should evaluate reforms relative to the status quo, which may already be quite bad for inequality. Political feasibility seems a more natural motivation on its face, but is undermined for two reasons. First, as the author notes in Section 5.3, if the goal is really to seek out reforms which are politically feasible, then that is arguably better captured by modeling the political process directly, e.g., by minimizing the number of people who are losers. Second, it\'92s not clear why even a Pareto improvement should be politically uncontroversial, since particular groups may still wish to hold out for a larger share of the (positive) transfers generated by the reform. Particularly in a realistically dynamic environment with repeated opportunities for reform, a positive transfer may not be sufficient to guarantee political support. I would find it more natural to simply assert that Pareto improvements are a natural benchmark of interest. \
\
2. I was not sure how to interpret the mechanism design discussion on pp. 14-15. It seems intended to assuage concerns that a mechanism design approach would yield dramatically different conclusions. (E.g., the example mechanism on p. 15 \'93is just creating losers by another name.\'94) But my sense is that a mechanism design approach really might change the implications quite starkly. That approach would effectively allow for a more flexible set of policy instruments, such as covariate-specific nonlinear taxes on the externality-generating good. Indeed, if there are any subsets of the population (which can be identified with observables) with quite homogenous levels of gasoline consumption, then a Pareto-improving reform should be feasible in this model. Suppose that farmers in Wyoming purchase similar amounts of gasoline. Then a corrective tax, would create homogeneous costs within that subset. By assumption, the resulting benefits for the population are larger than the costs to those farmers, so a Pareto improving reform would be quite straightforward, via a lump-transfer from non-Wyoming-farmers. (Even more extreme, take any set of observables which uniquely identifies a particular person X \'97 then a tailored gas tax which reduces X\'92s consumption, accompanied by a transfer to X, can generate a Pareto improvement.) Such finely tuned policies \'97 which would be found by a mechanism design approach \'97 seem somewhat implausible to me, but then they should be ruled out on those grounds, rather than by suggesting that mechanism design is similarly unlikely to generate Pareto improvements. \
\
3. I did not quite follow the discussion of \'93Heterogeneity in behavioral response\'94 on p. 12 \'97 I am not sure whether I misunderstood it, or whether it is incorrect. The text states: \'93For a non-marginal tax or when the initial tax is above zero, the behavioral response (the own price demand elasticity for the good) will figure into the burden calculation (i.e., the envelope condition does not apply).\'94 I don\'92t see why the envelope condition would not apply here, even if elasticities are heterogeneous. Roy\'92s identity continues to hold even with heterogeneous elasticities, so it seems to me that one can compute the (first order) individual burdens of the tax using only the pre-reform level of consumption, without regard to the demand elasticities. Of course, elasticities affect the magnitude of the resulting gains from externality reduction, but those gains will depend only on the average demand response, not on the full joint distribution of consumption and elasticities. \
\
4. Section 4 exhibits an internal tension by analyzing the effect of a slight increase in a preexisting gasoline tax as if it were a newly introduced tax, beginning from an equilibrium of zero tax. This is explained on p. 18: \'93 I am interpreting existing gasoline and diesel taxes as having been motivated by considerations about the optimal way to raise revenue, irrespective of a carbon externality.\'94 This seems inconsistent. Regardless of the motivation for the existing gasoline tax, the presence of a preexisting tax implies that the introduction of a small (additional) corrective tax will generate a first-order negative fiscal externality through the reduction in gas tax revenues. Extending the Pareto condition to cover preexisting taxes, as suggested above, would address this issue.\
\
}